Transfer Learning for Speech and Language
Processing
Dong Wang and Thomas Fang Zheng
1. Center for Speech and Language Technologies (CSLT)
Research Institute of Information Technology, Tsinghua University
2. Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology
Beijing, 100084, P.R.China
Abstract—Transfer learning is a vital technique that gener-
alizes models trained for one setting or task to other settings
or tasks. For example in speech recognition, an acoustic model
trained for one language can be used to recognize speech in
another language, with little or no re-training data. Transfer
learning is closely related to multi-task learning (cross-lingual
vs. multilingual), and is traditionally studied in the name of
'model adaptation'. Recent advance in deep learning shows that
transfer learning becomes much easier and more effective with
high-level abstract features learned by deep models, and the
'transfer' can be conducted not only between data distributions
and data types, but also between model structures (e.g., shallow
nets and deep nets) or even model types (e.g., Bayesian models
and neural models). This review paper summarizes some recent
prominent research towards this direction, particularly for speech
and language processing. We also report some results from our
group and highlight the potential of this very interesting research
field1.
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) techniques have been extensively
exploited in modern speech and language processing re-
search [1], [2], [3]. Among the rich family of ML models and
algorithms, transfer learning is among the most interesting.
Generally speaking, transfer learning involves all methods that
utilize any auxiliary resources (data, model, labels, etc.) to
enhance model learning for the target task [4], [5], [6], [7].
This is very important for speech and language research, since
human speech and languages are so diverse and imbalanced.
There are more than 5, 000 languages around the world, and
the number is even bigger if dialects are counted. Among
this big family, 389 languages (nearly 6%) account for 94%
of the word's population, and the rest thousands languages
are spoken by very few people.2 Even for the 389 'big'
languages, only very few possess adequate resources (speech
signal, text corpus, lexicon, phonetic/syntactic regulations,
etc.) for speech and language research. If we talk about 'rich-
resource' languages, perhaps only English is in that category.
Additionally, resources in different domains are also highly
imbalanced, even for English. This means that almost all
research in speech and language confront the challenge of data
sparsity. More seriously, human language is such dynamic that
new words and domains emerge every day, and so no models
learned at a particular time will remain valid forever.
With such diversity, variation, imbalance and dynamics, it
is almost impossible for speech and language researchers to
1This
survey
will
be
continuously
updated
online
(http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06066) to reflect the recent progress on transfer
learning.
2https://www.ethnologue.com/statistics
learn a model from one single data resource and then put it on
the shelf. We have to resort to some more smart algorithms
that can learn from multiple languages, multiple data, multiple
domains and keep the model adapted. On the other hand, it
would not be very controversial to argue that human speech
and languages hold some common statistical patterns at both
the signal and symbolic levels, so that learning from multiple
resources is possible.
In fact, transfer learning has been studied for a long time
in a multitude of research fields in speech and language
processing, e.g., speaker adaptation and multilingual modeling
in speech recognition, cross-language document classification
and sentiment analysis. Most of the studies, however, are
task-driven in their own research fields and seldom hold
deep understanding about the position of their research in the
whole picture of transfer learning. This prevents researchers
from answering some important questions: how and in which
conditions their methods work, what are possible alternatives
of their methods, and what advantages can be achieved with
different alternatives? In this paper, we will give a brief
summary of the most promising transfer learning methods,
particularly within the modern deep learning paradigm. Special
focus will be put on the application of transfer learning in
speech and language processing, and some recent results from
our research team will be presented.
We highlight that it is not our goal to present an entire list of
the transfer learning methods in this paper. Instead, the focus is
put on the most promising approaches for speech and language
processing. Even with such a constraint, the work on transfer
learning is still too much to be enumerated, and we can only
touch a small part of the plenty techniques. We decide to focus
on two specific domains: speech recognition and document
classification, particularly the most recent advances based on
deep learning which is most relevant to our research. For
more detailed surveys on transfer learning in broad research
fields, readers are referred to the nice review articles from
Pan, Taylor, Bengio and Lu [4], [5], [6], [7] and the references
therein.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II gives a quick
review of the transfer learning approach, and Section III and
Section IV discuss application of transfer learning in speech
processing and language processing respectively. The paper is
concluded in Section V, with some discussions for the future
research directions in this very promising field.
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1225
APSIPA ASC 2015
II. TRANSFER LEARNING: A QUICK REVIEW
The motivation of transfer learning can be found in the idea
of "Learning to Learn", which stats that learning from scratch
(tabula rasa learning) is often limited, and so past experience
should be used as much as possible [8]. For instance, once
we learned that a hard apple is often sour, this experience can
be used when we select pears: we conjecture that hard pears
are also sour. This idea and associated research trace back
to 20 years ago and were summarized in the NIPS 95 work-
shop on 'Learning to Learn: Knowledge Consolidation and
Transfer in Inductive Systems' [9]. Many ideas and research
goals raised in that workshop last two decades and influence
our research till today, though the data, models, algorithms,
computing power have dramatically changed. Some of the
recent developments were discussed in several workshops,
e.g., the ICML 2011 workshop on unsupervised and transfer
learning3; the NIPS 2013 workshop on new directions in
transfer and multitask4; the ICDM 2015 workshop on practical
transfer learning5. In this section, we review some of the most
prominent approaches to transfer learning, particularly those
have been applied to or are potential for speech and language
processing.
A. Categories of transfer learning
The initial idea of transfer learning is to reuse the experi-
ence/knowledge obtained already to enhance learning for new
things. Depending on the relation of the 'old things' (source)
that we have learned and the 'new things' (target) that we
want to learn, a large amount of methods have been devised,
in different names by different authors. A short list of these
names include multitask learning, lifelong learning, knowledge
transfer, knowledge consolidation, model adaptation, concept
drift, covariance shift, etc. Different researchers hold different
views for the categorization of these methods. For example,
Pan and Yang [4] believed transfer learning should really
'transfer' something so multitask learning should be regarded
as a different approach, while Bengio [6] treated transfer
learning and multitask learning as synonyms.
In our opinion, the different learning methods mentioned
above can be regarded as particular implementations of trans-
fer learning applied in different conditions or by different
ways. For example, model adaptation is applied to conditions
where the data distributions of the source and target domains
are clearly different, while covariance drift is applied to con-
ditions where the distribution changes gradually. As another
example, knowledge transfer is applied to the condition where
the source model and target model are trained sequentially,
while multi-task learning is applied to the condition where the
source and target models are trained simultaneously. No matter
what forms and properties the learning methods hold, what
they all have in common is 'the attempt to transfer knowledge
from other sources to benefit the current inductive task', and
the benefit of the transfer involves faster convergence, more
robust models and less data sensitivity.
We can thus categorize transfer learning into several classes
according to the conditions that they apply to. Following the
3http://clopinet.com/isabelle/Projects/ICML2011/
4https://sites.google.com/site/learningacross/
5https://sites.google.com/site/icdmwptl2015/home
taxonomy in [4], we use data and task as two conditional
factors of transfer learning. For the data condition, it involves
the feature space X (e.g., audio or text) and the distribution
P(X) of the feature (e.g., financial news and scientific papers);
for the task condition, it involves the label space Y (e.g.,
speech phones or speaker identity) and the model M(x)
(e.g., probabilistic models or neural models). Any of the two
components of the two conditional factors can be the same
or different for the learning in the source and target domains,
and their relation is shown in Fig. 1. Note that if the feature
space is different for the source and target domains, then their
distributions are certainly different. Similarly, if the labels are
different, then the models are regarded as different, although
models from the same family might be used in the source and
target domains.
1
2
1
2
P1(x)
P2(x)
M1(x)
M2(x)
Fig. 1. Relation of the conditional factors in the transfer learning paradigm.
X1 and Y1 are the feature and label spaces respectively for the learning task
in the source domain, and X2 and Y2 are for the learning task in the target
domain. M1(x) and M2(x) represent the models in the source and target
domains, respectively.
According to whether the conditional factors (data and task)
of the learning in the source and target domains are different or
not, transfer learning methods can be categorized into several
classes. Table I shows some of the most popular transfer
learning approaches that are applicable in different conditions.
In the table, '+' means the corresponding conditional factor
is the same for the source and target domains, while '-'
means different. Note that transfer learning is such a large
research field and it is impossible to classify all the methods
in such a simple way. For example, an important factor that
discriminates different learning methods is whether or not the
data in the source and target domains are labelled, which is
not clearly reflected in the table (though we will discuss the
related issue in the next section). Anyway, Table I gives a
rough picture how big the family of transfer learning methods
and how they can be categorized according to the conditional
factors.
B. Transfer learning methods
We give a short description of the learning methods ap-
pearing in Table I. For each method, only the general idea
is presented, and application of these methods to speech and
language processing is left to the next sections.
1) Model adaptation and incremental training: The sim-
plest transfer learning is to adapt an existing model to meet
the change of data distribution. Both the feature and label
spaces are the same for the source and target domains, and
the models are the same. There are various approaches for
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1226
APSIPA ASC 2015
TABLE I
CATEGORIES OF TRANSFER LEARNING
Y+
Y−
M(x)+
M(x) -
X+
P(X)+
Conventional ML
Model transfer[10]
Multitask learning[11]
P(X)-
Model Adaptation[12], [13], incremental learning[14]
X−
Co-training[15]
Heterogeneous transfer learning[16], [17]
Analogy learning [18]
model adaptation. For example, the maximum a posterior
(MAP) [12] estimation and the maximum likelihood linear
regression (MLLR) algorithm [13]. If the distribution changes
gradually, then incremental or online learning is often used,
e.g. [14], [19], [20].
Note that the adaptation can be either supervised or unsuper-
vised. In the supervised learning, the data in the target domain
are labelled, while in the unsupervised learning, no labels are
available and they have to be generated by the model in the
source domain before the adaptation can be performed. The
latter case is often referred to as semi-supervised learning [21].
Note that semi-supervised learning is a general framework
to deal with unlabelled data, and can be applied to any
conditions where the label spaces are the same in the source
and target domains. We will come back to this method in
heterogeneous transfer learning that will be discussed shortly.
Another approach to dealing with unlabelled data is to use
them to derive new features (e.g., by linear projection) where
the distributions of the data in the source domain and the target
domain are close to each other. An interesting work towards
this direction is the approach based on transfer component
analysis (TCA) [22].
In another configuration, some unlabelled data are available
but the distribution is different from that of the target domain.
These data cannot be used for adaptation (either by semi-
supervised learning or TCA) otherwise the model will be
adapted to a biased condition. However, it can be used to assist
deriving more robust features. The idea is similar to TCA, but
the unlabelled data are not used as supervision about the target
domain, instead as an auxiliary information to derive more
domain-independent features. This approach is often referred
to as self-taught learning [23], and it essentially holds the same
idea as the more recent deep representation learning that will
be discussed in Section II-C.
2) Heterogeneous transfer learning:
A more complex
transfer learning scenario is to keep the labels and model
unchanged, however the features are different in the source
and target domains. The transfer learning in this scenario
is often called heterogeneous transfer learning. The basic
assumption for heterogeneous transfer learning is that some
correspondence between the source and target domains exist,
and this correspondence can be used to transfer knowledge
in one domain to another. For example, speech and text are
two domains, and there is clear correspondence between the
two domains based on human concepts: no matter we speak
or write 'chicken', it is clear that we refer to the same bird
that has wings but can not fly much.
The early research tried to define and utilize the correspon-
dence between the instances of the source and target domains.
For example, [24] employed an oracle word translator to
define some pivot words that were used to establish the cross-
domain correspondence by learning multiple linear classifiers
that predict the 'joint existence' of these words in the multi-
domain data. In [25] some instance-level co-occurrence data
were used to estimate the correspondence in the form of
joint or conditional probabilities; this correspondence was then
used to improve the model in the target domain by risk-
minimization inference. Asymmetric regularized cross-domain
transformation was proposed in [26], which tries to learn a
non-linear transform between the source and target domains by
class-labeled instances from both source and target domains.
Although an instance does not necessarily possess features
of both domains, the class labels offer the correspondence
information.
More recent approaches prefer to finding common represen-
tations of the source and target domains, for example by matrix
factorization [17], RBM-based latent factor learning [27], or
joint transfer optimization [28], [16], [29]. More recently, deep
learning and heterogeneous transfer learning are combined
where high-level features are derived by deep learning and
inter-domain transforms are learned by transfer learning [30].
We emphasize that most of the approaches discussed above
assume that the label space does not change when transferring
from the source domain to the target domain. A more ambi-
tious task is to learn from very different tasks for which the
label space is different from the target domain. For example,
the task in the source domain is to classify document senti-
ment, while in the target domain the task is to classify image
aesthetic value. This two tasks are fundamentally different,
however some analogy does exist between them. Learning cor-
respondence between two independent but analogous domains
is easy for humans [31], [32], [33], however it is very difficult
for machines. There has been long-term interest in analogy
learning among artificial intelligence researchers, e.g., [34],
[18], though not too much achievement yet. Interestingly, the
recent improvement in deep learning methods seems provide
more hope in this direction, by a unified framework for
representation learning and multitask learning. This will be
discussed in Section II-C.
3) Multiview co-training: A special case of heterogeneous
transfer learning is the multi-view co-training, which assumes
that each training instance involves features of both the source
and target domains, but only the feature in the target domain is
available at runtime. In this condition, heterogeneous transfer
learning is not very effective since the training instances in
the source domain are the same as the instances in the target
domain and so does not provide much additional information,
at least with supervised learning. However, the multi-view
property of the training data indeed can be used to improve
unsupervised learning with unlabelled data, by the approach
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1227
APSIPA ASC 2015
called co-training [15]. Specifically, co-training trains two
separate models with features of the source and target domains
respectively, and then generates labels for the unlabelled data
using one model, which are in turn used to update the other
model. This process iterates until convergence is obtained.
It is well-known that co-training leads to better models than
training with the feature of the target domain only.
4) Model transfer: If the feature and label spaces are the
same however the models are different for the source and
target domains, the knowledge learned by the source model
can be transferred to the target model by model transfer. For
example, in the source domain the model is a Gaussian mixture
model (GMM), while in the target domain the model is a deep
neural network (DNN). The transfer learning then exploits the
GMM to initialize and boost the DNN. This is the general
recipe in the modern DNN-based speech recognition system.
Recently, this model transfer has gained much attention in
the deep learning community. For example, it is possible to
learn simple neural nets from a complex DNN model, or vice
versa [10], [35], [36]. Some interesting work in this direction
will be presented in the next sections.
5) Multitask learning: In the case where the feature spaces
of the source and target domains are the same but the task
labels are significantly different, multitask learning is more
applicable [11], [37], [38]. The basic assumption of this
learning approach is that the source and target tasks are
closely related, either positively or negatively, so that learning
for one task helps learning the other in the form of mutual
regularization. Multitask learning is a general approach that
can be applied to boost various types of models including
kernel regression, k-nearest neighbour, and it can be even
employed to learn 'opposite' tasks simultaneously, e.g., text
content classification and emotion detection [39].
A particular issue of multitask learning is how to evaluate
the relevance of two tasks so that whether they can be learned
together can be determined. Although there is not a simple
solution yet, [38] indeed provided an interesting approach
that estimates the relevance between tasks by evaluating the
overlap of different tasks in the same semantic space.
C. Transfer learning in deep learning era
Deep learning almost changed everything, including transfer
learning. Because deep learning gains so much success in
speech and language processing [40], [41], [42], [43], we
put more emphasis on transfer learning methods based on
deep models in this paper. Roughly speaking, deep learning
consists of various models that involve multi-level represen-
tations and the associated training/inference algorithms. Typ-
ical deep models include deep belief networks (DBNs) [44],
deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs) [45], deep auto encoders
(DAEs) [46], [47], deep neural networks (DNNs) [48], [41]
and deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [49].
The success of deep models is largely attributed to their
capability of learning multi-level representations (features),
which simulates the processing pipeline of human brains
where information is processed in a hierarchical way. The
multi-level feature learning possesses several advantages. First,
it can learn high-level features which are more robust against
data variation than features at low-levels; second, it offers
a hierarchal parameter sharing that holds great expressive
power [50]; third, the feature learning can be easily conducted
without any labelled data and so is cheap; fourth, with a little
supervised training (fine-tuning), the learned models can be
well adapted to specific tasks [11], [51], [52].
For these reasons, deep learning provides a graceful frame-
work for transfer learning, which unifies almost all the ap-
proaches listed in Table I as representation learning. The basic
idea is to learn some high-level robust features that are shared
by multiple features and multiple tasks, so that all the knowl-
edge/model transfers are implemented as feature transfer. This
approach was advocated in the NIPS95 workshop as a major
research direction, but it was not such successful until deep
learning became a main stream in machine learning and related
fields [53], [6], [54], [55].
The transfer learning architecture based on deep representa-
tion learning is illustrated in Fig.2. The left part of this figure
is the joint training phase where heterogeneous input features
are projected onto a common semantic space by different
pre-processing networks, and the shared features involve rich
explanatory factors that can be used to perform multiple tasks.
The right part of the picture illustrates the adaptation phase,
where some data X2 for the target task Y2 have been provided,
either with or without labels, and the model is updated with the
new data which follows a distribution P ′
2(x) that is different
from the original distribution P2(x) in the joint training phase.
1
2
1
2
P1(x)
P2(x)
1
2
2
1
P'2(x)
Fig. 2. Transfer learning architecture with deep representation learning. X1
and Y1 are the feature and label spaces respectively for the learning task in
the source domain, and X2 and Y2 are for the learning task in the target
domain. At the runtime, only the target domain is concerned.
The framework in Fig. 2 is very flexible and covers almost
all the methods in Table I. For example, without the adap-
tation phase, it is basically a multitask learning, while using
multi-domain data also implements structural correspondence
learning and latent representation learning. If the joint training
phase involves only a single task, then the adaptation phase
implements the conventional model adaptation. It should be
highlighted that a particular advantage of the representation
learning framework is that the feature extractor can be trained
in an unsupervised way, e.g., by restricted Boltzmann ma-
chines (RBMs) [56] or auto-associators [46], therefore little
or no labelled data are required. According to [6], as long
as the distribution P(X) is relevant to the class-conditional
distribution P(Y |X), the unsupervised learning can improve
the target supervised learning, in terms of convergence speed,
amount of labelled data required and model quality.
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1228
APSIPA ASC 2015
An early work based on deep representation learning is [57],
where the authors used unsupervised learning (denoising auto-
encoders) to extract high-level features, and trained a sentiment
analysis system in one domain (e.g., book review). They found
that the system could be directly migrated to a new domain
(e.g., DVD review) and achieved much better performance
than competitive approaches including structural correspon-
dence learning (SCL) and spectral feature alignment (SFA).
This work demonstrated that high-level abstract features are
highly domain-independent and could be easily transferred
across domains, even without any adaptation. As another
example, [58] showed that CNN-based representations learned
from a large image database imageNet were successfully
applied to represent images in another database PASCAL
VOC. A similar study was proposed recently in [59] where
CNN features trained on multiple tasks were successfully
applied to analyze biological images in multiple domains.
In another example called 'one-short learning' [60], high-
level features trained on a large image database were found
to be highly generalizable, and a very few labeled data could
adapt models to recognize unseen objects by identifying the
most relevant features. In a more striking configuration, the
learning task can be specified as an input vector (task vector,
e.g., a vector that represents a subregion of the data where the
classification takes place) and fed into the deep nets together
with the input data. The network then can learn the complex
relationship between the data vector, the task vector, and the
task labels. As long as the new task can be related to the
tasks seen in the training phase (which can be obtained by a
distributed task vector with which the relation between tasks
can be estimated from the distance between task vectors), the
new task can be well performed without any adaptation. This
leads to the zero-data learning [61] and zero-shot learning [62].
III. TRANSFER LEARNING IN SPEECH PROCESSING
Speech signals are pseduo-stationary and change vastly
according to a large number of factors (language, gender,
speaker, channel, environment, emotion, ...). Dealing with
these varieties is the core challenge of the speech processing
research, and transfer learning is an important tool to solve the
problem. It is not possible to cover all the researches in a short
paper, so we select three most prominent fields where transfer
learning has gained much success: transfer across languages,
transfer across speakers, and transfer across models.
A. Cross-lingual and multilingual transfer
It is natural to believe that some common patterns are shared
across languages. For example, many consonants and vowels
are shared across languages, defined by some universal phone
sets, e.g., IPA. This sharing among human languages have been
utilized explicitly or implicitly to improve statistical strength in
multilingual conditions, and has delivered better models than
training with monolingual data, especially for low-resource
languages. This advantage has been demonstrated in a multi-
tude of research fields, though our review simply focuses on
speech recognition and speech enhancement.
Early approaches to employing cross-lingual or multilingual
resources is via some linguistic correspondence, e.g., by a
universal phone set or a pair-wised phone mapping [63],
[64]. With the popularity of deep learning, the DNN-based
multilingual approach in the form of representation learning
gained much interest. The basic idea is that the features
learned by DNN models tend to be language-independent
at low layers and more language-dependent at high layers.
Therefore multilingual data can be used to train a multilingual
DNN where the low-level layers are shared by all languages,
while the high-level layers are language specific. This is fully
consistent with the representation learning framework shown
in Fig. 2, where Y1 and Y2 represent two languages. By
this sharing diagram, the features can be better learned with
multilingual data, and for each language, training only the
language-specific part is much easier than training the entire
network.
The initial investigation was proposed in [65], where mul-
tilingual data were used to initialize the DNN model for the
target language. Interesting improvement was reported and this
approach was quickly followed by researchers, with both the
DNN-HMM hybrid setting and the tandem setting.
With the hybrid setting, DNNs are used to replace the
conventional GMMs to estimate the likelihood of HMM states.
In the multilingual scenario, the hidden layers of the DNN
structure are shared across languages and each language holds
its own output layer [66], [67], [68]. The training process
then learns a shared feature extractor as well as language-
dependent classifiers. This approach was proposed indepen-
dently by three research groups in 2013, and tested on three
different databases: English and Mandarin data [66], eleven
Romance languages [67] and the global phone dataset with 19
languages [68]. A simple extension of the above setting is to
involve multiple layers in the language-specific part, or simply
use different classifiers (the default is software regression),
although the latter is much similar to the tandem approach
discussed below.
With the tandem setting, DNNs are used as feature exactors,
based on which posterior features or bottleneck features are
obtained and are used to train conventional GMM-HMM
systems. In [69], [70], the same DNN structure as in the hybrid
setting was used to train a multilingual DNN, however the
model was used to produce features (from the last hidden
layer) instead of state likelihood. It was showed that the
features generated by multilingual DNNs are rather language-
independent and can be used directly for new languages. With
limited adaptation data in the target language, additional per-
formance could be obtained. The same approach was proposed
in [71], though the features were read from a hidden layer
in the middle layer (the bottle net layer with less neurons
than other layers) instead of the last hidden layer. The features
produced in this way are often referred to as bottleneck (BN)
features. Combing with a universal phone set, the language-
independent BN features can be used to train models for
languages even without any labelled data [72].
The hybrid setting and tandem setting can be combined.
For example, in [73], the BN feature was first derived from
a multilingual DNN, and then it was combined with the
original feature to train a hybrid system. A similar approach
was proposed in [74], where the BN feature extractor for
each language was regarded as a module, and another DNN
combined the BN features from the modules of multiple
languages to construct the hybrid system.
The multilingual DNN approach described above belongs
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1229
APSIPA ASC 2015
to multitask learning which can be extended to more general
settings. For example, in [75] phone recognition and grapheme
recognition were treated as two different tasks to supervise
the DNN acoustic model training. They tested on three low-
resource south African languages and showed that the mutitask
training indeed improved performance. They also compared
the multitask training with the conditional training where the
grapheme recognition provided additional input for the phone
recognition, instead of co-supervision.
In a slightly different configuration, we reported a multitask
learning which learns speech content and speaker accent
together [76]. In this approach, a pronunciation vector that
represents the accent of a speaker is generated by either an i-
vector system [77] or a DNN system [78]. This pronunciation
vector can be integrated in the input or hidden layers as
additional features (the conditional learning), or used as an
auxiliary output of a hidden layer (the multitask learning). In
the latter setting, the pronunciation vector plays the role of
a regularization to help learn better representations that can
disentangle the underlying factors of the speech signal. We
tested the method in an English ASR task where the speech
data are in multiple accents (British and Chinese). We found
that both the two approach could improve performance for
utterances in both British and Chinese accents. An advantage
with the second setting, however, is that the pronunciation
vector is required only at the training phase. This is actually
a heterogeneous multitask learning that has been proposed for
a long time [11] but has not been studied much in speech
processing.
Besides speech recognition, cross-lingual and multilingual
transfer were also proposed for speech enhancement. The
assumption is that the noise and reverberation that need to be
removed are largely language-independent, and therefore an
enhancement model trained with the data in one language can
be applied directly to other languages. For example, in [79],
an DNN architecture trained in English data was demonstrated
to be highly effective for enhancing speech signals in Chinese,
by re-using the first several layers which were assumed to be
language-independent. Another study published recently from
our group demonstrated that a DNN structure can be used to
remove music from speech in multilingual conditions [80].
B. Speaker adaptation
Speaker adaptation is another domain in which transfer
learning has gained brilliant success. In the paradigm of
parametric statistic models (e.g., Gaussian models or Gaussian
mixture models), maximum a posterior (MAP) estimation [12]
and maximum likelihood linear regression (MLLR) [13] are
two most successful methods to adapt a general model to a
specific speaker. These methods are still the research focus of
some authors, e.g. [81], [82], [83]. A short survey for these
early-stage techniques can be found in [84].
In the deep learning era, DNN models are widely used
nearly everywhere. However, adapting neural network, par-
ticular a deep one, is not simple, because DNN is a highly
compact distributed model. It is not easy to learn a simple
form (with limited amount of parameters) such as MLLR to
update all parameters of the network. However, recent research
shows that with some particular constrains on the adaptation
structure, speaker adaptation is possible for DNN models.
An early study reported in [85] introduced a user vec-
tor (user code) to represent a speaker, and the vector was
augmented to the input and hidden layers. The learning
then trained the network and the speaker code simultane-
ously. To adapt to a new speaker, the network was fixed
while the speaker vector was inferred by the conventional
back-propagation algorithm [86]. This approach was extended
in [87] by involving a transform matrix before the speaker
vector was augmented to the input and hidden layers, possibly
in the form of low-rank matrices.
In a similar setting, the speaker code can be replaced by
a more general speaker vector produced by exotic models,
e.g., the famous i-vector [77]. Different from the speaker code
approach, these speaker vectors do not need to be adapted
(although it is possible) [88], [89], [90], [91]. An advantage
of using exotic speaker vectors is that the speaker vector
model can be trained with a large unlabelled database in
an unsupervised fashion. A disadvantage is that no phone
information is considered when deriving the vectors, at least
it is case with the i-vector model. A careful analysis for the
i-vector augmentation was conducted in [92], which showed
that i-vectors not only compensate for speaker variance but
also acoustic variance.
In contrast to involving an speaker vector, the second
approach to speaker adaptation for DNN models is to update
the DNN model directly, with some constraints on which
components of the DNN should be adapted. For example,
the adaptation can be conducted on the input layer [93],
[94], the activations of hidden layers [95], [96], [97], or
the output layer [94]. Some comparison for adaptation on
different components can be found in [98], [99]. In order
to constrain the adaptation more aggressively, [100], [101]
studied a singular value decomposition (SVD) approach which
decomposes a weight matrix as production of low rank matri-
ces, and only the singular values are updated for each speaker.
Another constraint for speaker adaptation is based on a prior
distribution over the output of the adapted network, which is
imposed by the output of the speaker-independent DNN, in
the form of KL-divergence [102].
Another interesting approach to speaker adaptation for DNN
models is to apply transfer learning to project features to a
canonical speaker-independent space where a model can be
well trained. For example, the famous constrained MLLR
(CMLLR) in the HMM-GMM architecture [13]. Recently,
an auto-encoder trained with speaker vectors (obtained from
a regression-based speaker transform) was used to produce
speaker-independent BN features [103]. A similar approach
was studied in [104], though an i-vector was used as the
speaker representation.
Most of the above researches are based on the DNN
structure. Recent research shows that RNNs can be adapted
in a similar way. For example, [105] reported an extensive
study on speaker adaptation for LSTMs. It was found that
LSTMs can be effectively adapted by using speaker-adaptive
(SA) front-end (e.g., a speaker-aware DNN projection [104]),
or by inserting speaker-dependent layers.
It should be noted that DNN itself possesses great advan-
tage of learning multiple conditions. Therefore, DNN models
trained with a large amount of data of multiple speakers
can deal with speaker variation pretty well. This conjecture
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1230
APSIPA ASC 2015
was demonstrated by [99], which showed that the adaptation
methods provide some improvement if the network is small
and the amount of training data is medium, however for a large
network trained with a large mount of data, the improvement
is insignificant.
The techniques discussed above are mostly applied to
speech recognition, however they can be easily migrated
to other applications. For example in HMM-based speech
synthesis, model adaptation based on MAP and MLLR has
been widely used to produce specific voice, e.g., [106], [107],
[108], [109]. Particularly, speaker adaptation is often coupled
with language adaptation to obtain multilingual synthesis, e.g.,
by state mapping [107], [110], [111]. For DNN-based speech
synthesis [112], [113], [114], it is relatively new and the
adaptation methods have not been extensively studied, except
a few exceptions [115], [116].
C. Model transfer
A recent progress in transfer learning is to learn a new
model (child model) from an existing model (teacher model),
which is known as model transfer. This was mentioned in
the seminal paper of multitask learning [11] and was recently
rediscovered by several researchers in the context of deep
learning [117], [10], [118]. The initial idea was that the teacher
model learns rich knowledge from the training data and this
knowledge can be used to guide the training of child models
which are simple and hence unable to learn many details
without the teacher's guide. To distill the knowledge from
the teacher model, the logit matching approach proposed by
Ba [117] teaches the child model by encouraging its logits
(activations before softmax) close to those generated by the
teacher model in terms of square error, and the dark knowledge
distiller model proposed by Hinton [10] encourages the output
of the child model close to those of the teacher model in terms
of cross entropy.
This approach has been applied to learn simple models
from complex models so that the simple model can approach
the performance of the complex model. For example, [118]
utilized the output of a complex DNN as regularization to learn
a small DNN that is suitable for speech recognition on mobile
devices. [119] used a complex RNN to train a DNN. Recently,
a new architecture called FitNet was proposed [120]. Instead
of regularizing the output, FitNet regularizes hidden units so
that knowledge learned by the intermediate representations
can be transferred to the target model, which is suitable for
training a model whose label space is different from that of
the teacher model. This work was further extended in [121],
where multiple hidden layers were regularized by the teacher
model. Another example is to transfer heterogeneous models.
For instance, in [122], unsupervised learning models (PCA and
ICA) were used to model the outputs of a DNN model. This
in fact treats the DNN output as an intermediate feature, and
uses the feature for general tasks, e.g., classifying instances
from novel classes.
Our recent work [35] showed that this model transfer can
not only learn simple models from complex models, but also
the reverse: a weak model can be used to teach a stronger
model. In our work [35], a DNN model was used to train
a powerful complex RNN. We found that by the model
transfer learning, RNNs can be learned pretty well with the
regularization of a DNN model, though the teacher model
is weaker than the target one. In a related work [36], we
found that the model transfer learning can be used as a new
pre-training approach, and it even works in some scenarios
where the RBM pre-training and layer-wised discriminative
pre-training do not work. Additionally, combining the RMB-
based pre-training and the model transfer pre-training can offer
additional gains, at least in our experimental setting where the
training data is not very abundant.
IV. TRANSFER LEARNING IN LANGUAGE PROCESSING
As in speech processing, the basic assumption of transfer
learning for language processing is also intuitive: all human
languages share some common semantic structures (e.g., con-
cepts and syntactic rules). Following this idea, the simple way
of transfer learning in multilingual or multi-domain scenarios
is to construct some cross-lingual/cross-domain correspon-
dence so that knowledge learned in one language/domain can
be transferred and reused in another language/domain. For
example, a bi-lingual lexicon can be used to provide instance-
level correspondence so that syntactic knowledge learned in
one language can be used to improve the syntactic learning in
the second language [123]. Another approach that gained more
attention recently is to learn a common latent space that are
shared by different languages or domains, so that knowledge
can be aggregated, leading to improved statistic strength for
probabilistic modeling in each single language or domain.
Once again, transfer learning is such a broad research field
and the research of language processing is even more broad
itself, which makes a detailed review for all the research
fields impossible in such a short paper. We will focus on
two particular fields: cross-lingual learning and cross-domain
learning, particularly for the document classification task.
A. Cross-lingual and multilingual transfer learning
A straightforward way to transfer knowledge between lan-
guages is to translate words from one language to another
by a bi-lingual lexicon. For example, this approach was used
in [124] to translate a maximum entropy (ME) classifier
trained in English data to a classifier used for classifying
Chinese documents. In another work from our group, we
have applied this approach successfully to train multilingual
language models, where some foreign words need to be
addressed [125]. Word-by-word translation, however, is ob-
viously not ideal since no syntactic constraints in different
languages are considered. A more complicated approach is to
translate the whole sentence by machine translation [126], so
that any labelling or classification tasks in one language can
be conducted with models trained in another language.
A more recent approach to multilingual learning is to
learn some common latent structures/representations based on
multilingual data. For example, the multilingual LDA model
proposed in [127] assumes a common latent topic space,
so that words from multiple languages can share the same
topics. This is similar to the RMB-based heterogeneous factor
learning [27]: both are based on unsupervised learning with
weak supervision, i.e., no word alignment is required.
A similar approach proposed in [128] learns multilingual
word clusters, where a cluster may involve words from differ-
ent languages. This was achieved by means of a probabilistic
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1231
APSIPA ASC 2015
model over large amounts of monolingual data in two lan-
guages, coupled with parallel data through which cross-lingual
correspondence was obtained. Applying to the NER task, it
was found that up to 26% performance improvement was
observed with the multi-lingual model. This work was extend
in [129] where cross-lingual clusters were used to 'directly'
transfer an NER model trained in the source language to the
target language.
Another approach to constructing common latent space is
by linear projection instead of statistical models. For example,
in the heterogeneous feature augmentation (HFA) approach
proposed in [29], two linear projections are learned to project
features in different languages to a common space. In their
study, these projections were used to produce additional fea-
tures that were augmented to the original features to train
the model in the target language. An interesting part of their
approach is to train the supervision model (e.g., SVM) in the
source and target languages simultaneously. This leads to a
joint optimization for the common space projections as well as
the classifiers. The approach was tested on a text classification
task with the Reuters multilingual database and obtained good
performance. In another work [24], a linear projection was
learned by optimizing a set of multi-lingual classifier, each of
which predicted the existence of the words of a bi-lingual
word-pair. The approach was tested on cross-lingual topic
discovery and sentiment classification.
Recently, word embedding becomes a hot topic [130], [131],
[132], [133], [134]. Intuitively, word embedding represents
each word as a low-dimensional dense vector (word vector)
with the constraint that relevant words are located more closely
than irrelevant words. This embedding enables semantic com-
puting over words, and provides new ways for mulitilingual
learning: if word vectors can be trained in a multilingual
fashion, regressors/classifiers trained on these vectors naturally
apply to multiple languages.
A simple approach is to map word vectors trained in
individual languages to a single space. For example, in [135],
it was found that a linear transform can project word vectors
trained in one languages to word vectors in another language
so that relevant words are put closely, in spite of their lan-
guages. This projection can be learned simply by some pivot
word pairs from the two languages. We extended this work
in [136] by modeling the transfer as an orthogonal transform.
A more systematic approach was proposed by [137], where
different languages were projected to the same space by
different projections, and the projections were determined by
maximizing the canonical correlation of the corresponding
words in the projected space. This approach requires one-
to-one word correspondence, which was obtained by aligned
parallel data.
A potential problem of the above approaches is that the word
vectors and projections are learned separately. The approach
proposed in [138] does not learn any projection, instead
the bi-lingual correspondence was taken into account in the
embedding process. This work was based on the neural LM
model [130] and changed the objective function by involving
an extra term that encourages relevant words in different
languages located together. The relevance of words in different
languages was derived from aligned parallel data.
In another work [139], the relevance constraint was em-
ployed at the sentence level. Word vectors were aggregated
into a sentence embedding, and relevant sentences were em-
bedded closely. This approach does not require word alignment
and so can be easily implemented. Additionally, this approach
can be simply extended to document level models, for which
only document pairs are required, without any sentence-
level alignment. This approach was tested on a multilingual
classification task.
A similar work was proposed by [140]. As in [139], only
sentence pairs are required in the learning; the difference
is that the embedding leveraged both monolingual data and
bi-lingual data, and employd noise-contrastive training to
improve efficiency. Good performance was obtained in both
cross-lingual document classification and word-level transla-
tion.
An interesting research that involves much ingredient of
deep learning was proposed by [30]. The basic idea is to learn
high-level document features individually in each language by
unsupervised learning (i.e., mSDA in that paper), and then
learn the correspondence (transform) using parallel data. The
raw and high-level features can be combined to train the
classifier in one language, and documents in another language
can be transferred to the rich language and are classified there.
The idea of applying unsupervised learning to learn high-level
features is prominent, which may help remove noises in the
raw data thus leading to more reliable transform estimation.
The approach was tested on several multilingual sentiment
classification tasks where the raw document feature was TF-
IDF and the high-level features were learned by mSDA. Good
performance was reported.
B. Cross-domain transfer learning
Cross-domain transfer learning has two different meaning:
when the domain refers to applications, then the difference is
in the data distribution; when it refers to features, then the
difference is in feature types or modalities, e.g., audio feature
or image feature. We focus on the feature domain transfer,
which is relatively new and invokes much interest recently.
With the simplest approach, multi-modal features can be com-
bined either at the feature level or the score level. For example
on the semantic relatedness task, [141] concatenated visual
and textual features to train multi-stream systems; in [142], the
scores predicted by multiple models based on different features
are combined. A more complex setting involves transferring
knowledge between models built with heterogeneous features.
Note that some authors regard different languages as different
domains, e.g., [30]. However, we focus on transfer learning
between different feature modalities.
An example is the work proposed in [25], where the au-
thors used co-occurrence data to estimate the correspondence
between different features, i.e., image and text. The estimated
correspondence was then used to assist the classification task
in the target domain, by transferring the target features to
the source domain where a good classification model had
been constructed. The authors formulated this transfer process
using a Markov chain and risk minimization inference. The
method was tested on a text-aided image classification task
and achieved significant performance improvement.
The common latent space approach was studied in [143],
with the task of image segmentation and labelling. The model
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1232
APSIPA ASC 2015
was based on kernelized canonical correlation analysis which
finds a mapping between visual and textual representations by
projecting them into a latent semantic space.
Deep learning provides an elegant way for cross-domain
transfer learning, with its great power in learning high-level
representations shared by multiple modalities [54]. For exam-
ple, in [62], [144], images and words are embedded in the
same low-dimensional space via neural networks, by which
image classification can be improved by the word embedding,
even for classes without any image training data. [145] pro-
posed a multi-modal neural language modeling approach with
which the history and prediction can be both text and images,
so that the prediction between multiple modalities becomes
possible. In [146], an RNN structure based on dependency-tree
was proposed to embed textual sentences into compositional
vectors, which were then projected together with image rep-
resentations to a common space. Within this common space,
multi-modal retrieval and annotation can be easily conducted.
The same idea was proposed by [147], though deep Boltzmann
machines were used instead of DNNs to infer the common
latent space.
C. Model transfer
Model transfer, which aims to learn one model from another,
has not yet been extensively studied in language processing. A
recent work [148] studied a knowledge distilling approach on
the sentiment classification task. The original classifier was a
large neural net with large word vectors as input, and a small
network was learned in two ways: either using the output of
the large network as supervision or directly transferring large
word vectors to smaller ones.
In a recent study [149], we show that it is possible to learn
a neural model using supervision from a Bayesian model.
Specifically, we tried to learn a document vector from the
raw TF input using a neural net, supervised by the vector
representation produced by latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA).
Our experimental results showed that with a two-layer neural
network, it is possible to learn document vectors that are quite
similar to the ones produced by LDA, while the inference is
hundreds of times faster.
V. PERSPECTIVE AND CONCLUSIONS
We gave a very brief review of transfer learning, and intro-
duced some applications of this approach in speech and lan-
guage processing. Due to the broad landscape of this research
and the limited knowledge of the authors, only very limited
areas were touched. Also, many important contributions in
the 'history' had to be omitted, for the sake of emphasis on
more recent directions in the past few years, especially deep
learning. Even with such a limited review, we can still clearly
see the important role that transfer learning plays and how fast
it has evolved recently. For speech and language processing,
transfer learning is essentially important as both speech and
language are diverse, imbalance, dynamic and inter-linked,
which makes transfer learning inevitable.
Transfer learning can be conducted in very different man-
ners. It can be conducted as a shared learning that learns
various domains and tasks together, or as a tandem learning
which learns a model in one domain/task and migrates the
model to another domain/task. It can be conducted with a
supervised way where labeled data are used to refine the
classifier, or an unsupervised way where numerous unlabelled
data are used to learn better representations. It can be used
to transfer instances, representations, structures and models. It
can transfer between different distributions, different features
and different tasks.
Go back to the NIPS 95 workshop, where some questions
were raised by the famous researchers at that time. Two
decades later, we can answer some of the questions, while
other remains mystery:
• What do we mean by related tasks and how can we
identify them? It is still difficult to measure relatedness,
particularly with the complex configurations of transfer
learning. However, we do know some possible metrics,
e.g., the relatedness between marginal and conditional
distributions [6] in unsupervised feature learning, or rep-
resentation overlap in model adaptation [38]. Particularly,
we now know that even two tasks are intuitively unrelated
(e.g., speech recognition and speaker recognition), trans-
fer learning still works by utilizing the fact that the tasks
are unrelated [39].
• How do we predict when transfer will help (or hurt)?
Again, it is not easy to find a complete solution. However
some approaches indeed can alleviate negative transfer,
e.g., [150], [38]. With deep learning, the risk of negative
transfer seems substantially reduced. For example, any
data in related domains can be used to assist learning ab-
stract features, even they are sampled from a distribution
different from the target domain [23]. This is not the case
twenty years ago.
• What are the benefits: speed, generalization, intelligibil-
ity,...? Seems all of these can be improved by transfer
learning.
• What should be transferred: internal representations,
parameter settings, features,...? We now know all these
components can be transferred.
• How should it be transferred: weight initialization, bias-
ing the error metric,...? All these methods can be used,
although it seems that the regularization view is more
attractive and it is related to modifying the objective
function.
• How do we look inside to see what has been transferred?
This question is more related to model adaptation and the
answer is model-dependent. For example with a DNN
model which is highly compact, it is not simple to
investigate which part of the model has been changed
after adaptation.
Transfer learning has been widely studied in speech and
language processing, particularly for model adaptation. Recent
advance in multilingual learning and heterogeneous feature
transform demonstrates the power of transfer learning in a
more clear way. Nevertheless, compared to the very diverse
methods studied in the machine learning community, appli-
cation of transfer learning in speech and language research
is still very limited. There are many questions remain unan-
swered, for example: can we learn common representations
for both speech, language and speaker recognition? Can we
learn acoustic models for voiced speech and whistle speech
together? How about sign language? How to use large volume
of unlabeled video data to regularize speech models? How
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1233
APSIPA ASC 2015
pronunciation models can be used to regularize NLP tasks?
How to involve heterogeneous resources including audio,
visual, language to solve the most challenging tasks in the
respective research fields? How to utilize the large amount of
unlabeled data more efficiently in the big-data era? To solve
these problems, we believe collaboration among researchers
who have been used to work independently in their own areas
is mostly required.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by the National Science Foun-
dation of China (NSFC) under the project No. 61271389
and No. 61371136, and the National Basic Research Program
(973 Program) of China under Grant No. 2013CB329302. It
was also supported by the MESTDC PhD Foundation Project
No.20130002120011, as well as Sinovoice and Huilan Ltd.
Thanks to Zhiyuan Tang for the careful reference collection.
REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Martin and D. Jurafsky, "Speech and language processing,"
International Edition, 2000.
[2] J. Benesty, Springer handbook of speech processing. Springer Science
& Business Media, 2008.
[3] L. Deng and X. Li, "Machine learning paradigms for speech recog-
nition: An overview," Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1060–1089, 2013.
[4] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, "A survey on transfer learning," Knowledge and
Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–
1359, 2010.
[5] M. E. Taylor and P. Stone, "Transfer learning for reinforcement learning
domains: A survey," The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 10, pp. 1633–1685, 2009.
[6] Y. Bengio, "Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and
transfer learning," in ICML Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, 2012.
[7] J. Lu, V. Behbood, P. Hao, H. Zuo, S. Xue, and G. Zhang, "Transfer
learning using computational intelligence: A survey," Knowledge-Based
Systems, vol. 80, pp. 14–23, 2015.
[8] S. Thrun and L. Pratt, Learning to learn. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
[9] "NIPS
95
workshop
on
learning
to
learn:
Knowledge
consolidation
and
transfer
in
inductive
systems,"
1995.
[Online].
Available:
http://socrates.acadiau.ca/courses/comp/dsilver/
NIPS95 LTL/transfer.workshop.1995.html
[10] G. E. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, "Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network," in NIPS 2014 Deep Learning Workshop, 2014.
[11] R. Caruana, "Multitask learning," Machine learning, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
41–75, 1997.
[12] J.-L. Gauvain and C.-H. Lee, "Maximum a posteriori estimation for
multivariate Gaussian mixture observations of Markov chains," IEEE
Transactions on Speech and audio processing, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 291–
298, 1994.
[13] C. J. Leggetter and P. Woodland, "Maximum likelihood linear re-
gression for speaker adaptation of continuous density hidden Markov
models," Computer Speech & Language, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 171–185,
1995.
[14] P. E. Utgoff, "Incremental induction of decision trees," Machine
learning, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 161–186, 1989.
[15] A. Blum and T. Mitchell, "Combining labeled and unlabeled data
with co-training," in Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference
on Computational learning theory.
ACM, 1998, pp. 92–100.
[16] C. Wang and S. Mahadevan, "Heterogeneous domain adaptation using
manifold alignment," in IJCAI Proceedings-International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 22, no. 1, 2011, p. 1541.
[17] Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, Z. Lu, S. J. Pan, G.-R. Xue, Y. Yu, and Q. Yang,
"Heterogeneous transfer learning for image classification." in AAAI,
2011.
[18] H.-Y. Wang and Q. Yang, "Transfer learning by structural analogy," in
AAAI.
Citeseer, 2011.
[19] O. Arandjelovic and R. Cipolla, "Incremental learning of temporally-
coherent Gaussian mixture models," Society of Manufacturing Engi-
neers (SME) Technical Papers, pp. 1–1, 2006.
[20] A. Declercq and J. H. Piater, "Online learning of Gaussian mixture
models-a two-level approach." in VISAPP (1), 2008, pp. 605–611.
[21] X. Zhu, "Semi-supervised learning literature survey," Computer Sci-
ences TRP 1530, University of Wisconsin C Madison, 2005.
[22] S. J. Pan, I. W. Tsang, J. T. Kwok, and Q. Yang, "Domain adaptation
via transfer component analysis," Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 199–210, 2011.
[23] R. Raina, A. Battle, H. Lee, B. Packer, and A. Y. Ng, "Self-taught
learning: transfer learning from unlabeled data," in Proceedings of the
24th international conference on Machine learning.
ACM, 2007, pp.
759–766.
[24] P. Prettenhofer and B. Stein, "Cross-lingual adaptation using structural
correspondence learning," ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology (TIST), vol. 3, no. 1, p. 13, 2011.
[25] W. Dai, Y. Chen, G.-R. Xue, Q. Yang, and Y. Yu, "Translated learning:
Transfer learning across different feature spaces," in Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2008, pp. 353–360.
[26] B. Kulis, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell, "What you saw is not what you get:
Domain adaptation using asymmetric kernel transforms," in Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1785–1792.
[27] B. Wei and C. J. Pal, "Heterogeneous transfer learning with RBMs."
in AAAI, 2011.
[28] X. Shi, Q. Liu, W. Fan, P. S. Yu, and R. Zhu, "Transfer learning
on heterogenous feature spaces via spectral transformation," in Data
Mining (ICDM), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on.
IEEE,
2010, pp. 1049–1054.
[29] L. Duan, D. Xu, and I. Tsang, "Learning with augmented features
for heterogeneous domain adaptation," arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.4660,
2012.
[30] J. T. Zhou, S. J. Pan, I. W. Tsang, and Y. Yan, "Hybrid heterogeneous
transfer learning through deep learning," in Twenty-Eighth AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, 2014.
[31] D. Gentner, "Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy,"
Cognitive science, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 155–170, 1983.
[32] D. Gentner and K. J. Holyoak, "Reasoning and learning by analogy:
Introduction." American Psychologist, vol. 52, no. 1, p. 32, 1997.
[33] J. Blitzer, R. McDonald, and F. Pereira, "Domain adaptation with struc-
tural correspondence learning," in Proceedings of the 2006 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing.
Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2006, pp. 120–128.
[34] J. G. Carbonell, Learning by analogy: Formulating and generalizing
plans from past experience.
Springer, 1983.
[35] D. Wang, C. Liu, Z. Tang, Z. Zhang, and M. Zhao, "Recurrent
neural network training with dark knowledge transfer," arXiv preprint
arXiv:1505.04630, 2015.
[36] Z. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Pan, and Z. Zhang, "Knowledge transfer pre-
training," arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02256, 2015.
[37] J. Baxter, "A model of inductive bias learning," J. Artif. Intell.
Res.(JAIR), vol. 12, pp. 149–198, 2000.
[38] J. Guinney, Q. Wu, and S. Mukherjee, "Estimating variable structure
and dependence in multitask learning via gradients," Machine Learning,
vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 265–287, 2011.
[39] B. Romera-Paredes, A. Argyriou, N. Berthouze, and M. Pontil, "Ex-
ploiting unrelated tasks in multi-task learning," in International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2012, pp. 951–959.
[40] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed, N. Jaitly,
A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath et al., "Deep neural
networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared
views of four research groups," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, 2012.
[41] L. Deng and D. Yu, "Deep learning: Methods and applications,"
Foundations and Trends in Signal Processing, vol. 7, no. 3-4, pp. 197–
387, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2000000039
[42] X. He, J. Gao, and L. Deng, "Deep learning for natural language
processing and related applications (Tutorial at ICASSP)," in IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2014.
[43] J. Hirschberg and C. D. Manning, "Advances in natural language
processing," Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 261–266, 2015.
[44] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, "A fast learning algorithm
for deep belief nets," Neural computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–
1554, 2006.
[45] R. Salakhutdinov and G. E. Hinton, "Deep boltzmann machines," in
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2009,
pp. 448–455.
[46] Y. Bengio, P. Lamblin, D. Popovici, H. Larochelle et al., "Greedy
layer-wise training of deep networks," Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 19, p. 153, 2007.
[47] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol,
"Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1234
APSIPA ASC 2015
deep network with a local denoising criterion," The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 11, pp. 3371–3408, 2010.
[48] G. E. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, "Context-dependent pre-
trained deep neural networks for large-vocabulary speech recognition,"
Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2012.
[49] A. Graves, A.-R. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, "Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks," in Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 6645–6649.
[50] Y. Bengio and O. Delalleau, "On the expressive power of deep
architectures," in Algorithmic Learning Theory.
Springer, 2011, pp.
18–36.
[51] R. Collobert and J. Weston, "A unified architecture for natural lan-
guage processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning," in
Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning.
ACM, 2008, pp. 160–167.
[52] L. Deng, J. Li, J.-T. Huang, K. Yao, D. Yu, F. Seide, M. Seltzer,
G. Zweig, X. He, J. Williams et al., "Recent advances in deep learning
for speech research at Microsoft," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 8604–8608.
[53] S. M. Gutstein, Transfer learning techniques for deep neural nets. The
University of Texas at El Paso, 2010.
[54] J. Ngiam, A. Khosla, M. Kim, J. Nam, H. Lee, and A. Y. Ng,
"Multimodal deep learning," in Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on machine learning (ICML-11), 2011, pp. 689–696.
[55] Y. Bengio, I. J. Goodfellow, and A. Courville, Deep Learning,
2015, book in preparation for MIT Press. [Online]. Available:
http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/∼bengioy/dlbook
[56] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, "Reducing the dimensionality of
data with neural networks," Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
2006.
[57] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, "Domain adaptation for large-
scale sentiment classification: A deep learning approach," in Proceed-
ings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-
11), 2011, pp. 513–520.
[58] M. Oquab, L. Bottou, I. Laptev, and J. Sivic, "Learning and transferring
mid-level image representations using convolutional neural networks,"
in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014 IEEE
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1717–1724.
[59] W. Zhang, R. Li, T. Zeng, Q. Sun, S. Kumar, J. Ye, and S. Ji, "Deep
model based transfer and multi-task learning for biological image
analysis," in Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, 2015,
pp. 1475–1484.
[60] L. Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, and P. Perona, "One-shot learning of object cate-
gories," Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 594–611, 2006.
[61] H. Larochelle, D. Erhan, and Y. Bengio, "Zero-data learning of new
tasks." in AAAI, vol. 1, no. 2, 2008, p. 3.
[62] R. Socher, M. Ganjoo, C. D. Manning, and A. Ng, "Zero-shot learning
through cross-modal transfer," in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2013, pp. 935–943.
[63] T. Schultz and A. Waibel, "Language-independent and language-
adaptive acoustic modeling for speech recognition," Speech Commu-
nication, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 31–51, 2001.
[64] N. T. Vu, F. Kraus, and T. Schultz, "Cross-language bootstrapping
based on completely unsupervised training using multilingual A-stabil,"
in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2011 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 5000–5003.
[65] P. Swietojanski, A. Ghoshal, and S. Renals, "Unsupervised cross-
lingual knowledge transfer in DNN-based LVCSR," in Spoken Lan-
guage Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012 IEEE.
IEEE, 2012, pp.
246–251.
[66] J.-T. Huang, J. Li, D. Yu, L. Deng, and Y. Gong, "Cross-language
knowledge transfer using multilingual deep neural network with shared
hidden layers," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 7304–7308.
[67] G. Heigold, V. Vanhoucke, A. Senior, P. Nguyen, M. Ranzato,
M. Devin, and J. Dean, "Multilingual acoustic models using distributed
deep neural networks," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
8619–8623.
[68] A. Ghoshal, P. Swietojanski, and S. Renals, "Multilingual training of
deep neural networks," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
7319–7323.
[69] K. Vesely, M. Karafi´at, F. Grezl, M. Janda, and E. Egorova, "The
language-independent bottleneck features," in Spoken Language Tech-
nology Workshop (SLT), 2012 IEEE.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 336–341.
[70] S. Thomas, M. L. Seltzer, K. Church, and H. Hermansky, "Deep neural
network features and semi-supervised training for low resource speech
recognition," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 6704–6708.
[71] Z. Tuske, J. Pinto, D. Willett, and R. Schluter, "Investigation on
cross-and multilingual mlp features under matched and mismatched
acoustical conditions," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
7349–7353.
[72] K. M. Knill, M. J. Gales, A. Ragni, and S. P. Rath, "Language
independent and unsupervised acoustic models for speech recognition
and keyword spotting," in Proc. Interspeech14, 2014.
[73] P. Bell, P. Swietojanski, and S. Renals, "Multi-level adaptive networks
in tandem and hybrid ASR systems," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 6975–6979.
[74] J. Gehring, Q. B. Nguyen, F. Metze, and A. Waibel, "DNN acoustic
modeling with modular multi-lingual feature extraction networks," in
Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU), 2013 IEEE
Workshop on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 344–349.
[75] D. Chen, B. Mak, C.-C. Leung, and S. Sivadas, "Joint acoustic
modeling of triphones and trigraphemes by multi-task learning deep
neural networks for low-resource speech recognition," in Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 5592–5596.
[76] X.
Z.
Zhiyuan
Tang,
"Speech
recognition
with
pronunciation
vecotrs," CSLT, Tsinghua University, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://cslt.riit.tsinghua.edu.cn/publications.php?Publication-trp
[77] N. Dehak, P. Kenny, R. Dehak, P. Dumouchel, and P. Ouellet, "Front-
end factor analysis for speaker verification," Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 788–798,
2011.
[78] V. Ehsan, L. Xin, M. Erik, L. M. Ignacio, and G.-D. Javier, "Deep
neural networks for small footprint text-dependent speaker verifica-
tion," IEEE International Conference on Acoustic, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 357–366, 2014.
[79] Y. Xu, J. Du, L.-R. Dai, and C.-H. Lee, "Cross-language transfer
learning for deep neural network based speech enhancement," in Chi-
nese Spoken Language Processing (ISCSLP), 2014 9th International
Symposium on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 336–340.
[80] M. Zhao, D. Wang, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhang, "Music removal by con-
volutional denoising autoencoder in speech recognition," in Interspeech
2015, 2015.
[81] M. L. Seltzer and A. Acero, "Separating speaker and environmental
variability using factored transforms." in INTERSPEECH, 2011, pp.
1097–1100.
[82] D. Povey and K. Yao, "A basis representation of constrained MLLR
transforms for robust adaptation," Computer Speech & Language,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–51, 2012.
[83] Y. Miao, F. Metze, and A. Waibel, "Learning discriminative basis
coefficients for eigenspace MLLR unsupervised adaptation," in Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 7927–7931.
[84] K. Shinoda, "Speaker adaptation techniques for automatic speech
recognition," Proc. APSIPA ASC 2011, 2011.
[85] O. Abdel-Hamid and H. Jiang, "Fast speaker adaptation of hybrid
NN/HMM model for speech recognition based on discriminative learn-
ing of speaker code," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
7942–7946.
[86] ——, "Rapid and effective speaker adaptation of convolutional neural
network based models for speech recognition." in INTERSPEECH,
2013, pp. 1248–1252.
[87] S. Xue, O. Abdel-Hamid, H. Jiang, and L. Dai, "Direct adaptation
of hybrid DNN/HMM model for fast speaker adaptation in LVCSR
based on speaker code," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp.
6339–6343.
[88] G. Saon, H. Soltau, D. Nahamoo, and M. Picheny, "Speaker adaptation
of neural network acoustic models using i-vectors," in Automatic
Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU), 2013 IEEE Workshop
on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 55–59.
[89] P. Karanasou, Y. Wang, M. J. Gales, and P. C. Woodland, "Adaptation
of deep neural network acoustic models using factorised i-vectors," in
Proc Interspeech, 2014.
[90] A. Senior and I. Lopez-Moreno, "Improving DNN speaker indepen-
dence with i-vector inputs," in Proc. ICASSP, 2014.
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1235
APSIPA ASC 2015
[91] V. Gupta, P. Kenny, P. Ouellet, and T. Stafylakis, "I-vector-based
speaker adaptation of deep neural networks for french broadcast audio
transcription," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2014 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 6334–6338.
[92] M. Rouvier and B. Favre, "Speaker adaptation of DNN-based ASR
with i-vectors: Does it actually adapt models to speakers?" in Fifteenth
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Asso-
ciation, 2014.
[93] J. Neto, L. Almeida, M. Hochberg, C. Martins, L. Nunes, S. Renals, and
T. Robinson, "Speaker-adaptation for hybrid HMM-ANN continuous
speech recognition system," in Proc. EUROSPEECH'95. International
Speech Communication Association, 1995.
[94] K. Yao, D. Yu, F. Seide, H. Su, L. Deng, and Y. Gong, "Adaptation of
context-dependent deep neural networks for automatic speech recog-
nition," in Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012 IEEE.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 366–369.
[95] R. Gemello, F. Mana, S. Scanzio, P. Laface, and R. De Mori, "Linear
hidden transformations for adaptation of hybrid ANN/HMM models,"
Speech Communication, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 827–835, 2007.
[96] S. M. Siniscalchi, J. Li, and C.-H. Lee, "Hermitian polynomial for
speaker adaptation of connectionist speech recognition systems," Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21,
no. 10, pp. 2152–2161, 2013.
[97] P. Swietojanski and S. Renals, "Learning hidden unit contributions for
unsupervised speaker adaptation of neural network acoustic models,"
in Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE,
2014, pp. 171–176.
[98] B. Li and K. C. Sim, "Comparison of discriminative input and
output transformations for speaker adaptation in the hybrid NN/HMM
systems," in Interspeech'10, 2010.
[99] H. Liao, "Speaker adaptation of context dependent deep neural net-
works," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013
IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 7947–7951.
[100] J. Xue, J. Li, D. Yu, M. Seltzer, and Y. Gong, "Singular value de-
composition based low-footprint speaker adaptation and personalization
for deep neural network," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp.
6359–6363.
[101] S. Xue, H. Jiang, and L. Dai, "Speaker adaptation of hybrid NN/HMM
model for speech recognition based on singular value decomposition,"
in Chinese Spoken Language Processing (ISCSLP), 2014 9th Interna-
tional Symposium on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.
[102] D. Yu, K. Yao, H. Su, G. Li, and F. Seide, "Kl-divergence regularized
deep neural network adaptation for improved large vocabulary speech
recognition," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2013 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 7893–7897.
[103] Y. Tang, A. Mohan, R. C. Rose, and C. Ma, "Deep neural net-
work trained with speaker representation for speaker normalization,"
in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2014 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 6329–6333.
[104] Y. Miao, H. Zhang, and F. Metze, "Towards speaker adaptive training
of deep neural network acoustic models," in Interspeech'14, 2014.
[105] Y. Miao and F. Metze, "On speaker adaptation of long short-term mem-
ory recurrent neural networks," in Sixteenth Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH)(To
Appear). ISCA, 2015.
[106] M. Tamura, T. Masuko, K. Tokuda, and T. Kobayashi, "Adapta-
tion of pitch and spectrum for HMM-based speech synthesis using
MLLR," in Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2001. Proceed-
ings.(ICASSP'01). 2001 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2001, pp. 805–808.
[107] Y.-J. Wu, Y. Nankaku, and K. Tokuda, "State mapping based method
for cross-lingual speaker adaptation in HMM-based speech synthesis."
in Interspeech, 2009, pp. 528–531.
[108] J. Yamagishi and T. Kobayashi, "Average-voice-based speech synthesis
using HSMM-based speaker adaptation and adaptive training," IEICE
TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 533–
543, 2007.
[109] J. Yamagishi, T. Kobayashi, Y. Nakano, K. Ogata, and J. Isogai,
"Analysis of speaker adaptation algorithms for HMM-based speech
synthesis and a constrained SMAPLR adaptation algorithm," Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 66–83, 2009.
[110] H. Liang, J. Dines, and L. Saheer, "A comparison of supervised and
unsupervised cross-lingual speaker adaptation approaches for HMM-
based speech synthesis," in Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2010 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp.
4598–4601.
[111] M. Gibson and W. Byrne, "Unsupervised intralingual and cross-lingual
speaker adaptation for HMM-based speech synthesis using two-pass
decision tree construction," Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 895–904, May 2011.
[112] Z.-H. Ling, L. Deng, and D. Yu, "Modeling spectral envelopes using
restricted boltzmann machines and deep belief networks for statistical
parametric speech synthesis," Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 2129–2139, 2013.
[113] H. Zen and A. Senior, "Deep mixture density networks for acoustic
modeling in statistical parametric speech synthesis," in Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 3844–3848.
[114] K. Hashimoto, K. Oura, Y. Nankaku, and K. Tokuda, "The effect of
neural networks in statistical parametric speech synthesis," in Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 4455–4459.
[115] B. Potard, P. Motlicek, and D. Imseng, "Preliminary work on speaker
adaptation for DNN-based speech synthesis," Idiap, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[116] Z. Wu, P. Swietojanski, C. Veaux, S. Renals, and S. King, "A study
of speaker adaptation for DNN-based speech synthesis," in Interspeech
2015, 2015.
[117] J. Ba and R. Caruana, "Do deep nets really need to be deep?" in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014, pp. 2654–
2662.
[118] J. Li, R. Zhao, J.-T. Huang, and Y. Gong, "Learning small-size
DNN with output-distribution-based criteria," in Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of International Speech Communication
Association (INTERSPEECH), September 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=230080
[119] W. Chan, N. R. Ke, and I. Lane, "Transferring knowledge from a RNN
to a DNN," arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.01483, 2015.
[120] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta, and Y. Ben-
gio, "Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets," arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6550,
2014.
[121] M. Long and J. Wang, "Learning transferable features with deep
adaptation networks," arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02791, 2015.
[122] Y. Lu, "Unsupervised learning of neural network outputs," arXiv
preprint arXiv:1506.00990, 2015.
[123] G. Durrett, A. Pauls, and D. Klein, "Syntactic transfer using a bilingual
lexicon," in Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012,
pp. 1–11.
[124] L. Shi, R. Mihalcea, and M. Tian, "Cross language text classification
by model translation and semi-supervised learning," in Proceedings
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010, pp.
1057–1067.
[125] X. Ma, X. Wang, and D. Wang, "Recognize foreign low-frequency
words with similar pairs," in Interspeech 2015, 2015.
[126] P. Koehn, Statistical machine translation. Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[127] W. De Smet, J. Tang, and M.-F. Moens, "Knowledge transfer across
multilingual corpora via latent topics," in Advances in Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining.
Springer, 2011, pp. 549–560.
[128] O. T¨ackstr¨om, R. McDonald, and J. Uszkoreit, "Cross-lingual word
clusters for direct transfer of linguistic structure," in Proceedings of
the 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012, pp. 477–487.
[129] O. T¨ackstr¨om, "Nudging the envelope of direct transfer methods for
multilingual named entity recognition," in Proceedings of the NAACL-
HLT Workshop on the Induction of Linguistic Structure.
Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2012, pp. 55–63.
[130] Y. Bengio, H. Schwenk, J.-S. Sen´ecal, F. Morin, and J.-L. Gauvain,
"Neural probabilistic language models," in Innovations in Machine
Learning.
Springer, 2006, pp. 137–186.
[131] A. Mnih and G. E. Hinton, "A scalable hierarchical distributed language
model," in NIPS, 2008, pp. 1081–1088.
[132] J. Turian, L. Ratinov, and Y. Bengio, "Word representations: a simple
and general method for semi-supervised learning," in Proceedings
of the 48th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010, pp. 384–
394.
[133] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and
P. Kuksa, "Natural language processing (almost) from scratch," The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2493–2537, 2011.
[134] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, "Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space," arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781,
2013.
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1236
APSIPA ASC 2015
[135] T. Mikolov, Q. V. Le, and I. Sutskever, "Exploiting similarities among
languages for machine translation," arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.4168,
2013.
[136] C. Xing, D. Wang, C. Liu, and Y. Lin, "Normalized word embedding
and orthogonal transform for bilingual word translation," in NAACL'15,
2015.
[137] M. Faruqui and C. Dyer, "Improving vector space word representa-
tions using multilingual correlation," in EACL'14.
Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2014.
[138] A. Klementiev, I. Titov, and B. Bhattarai, "Inducing crosslingual
distributed representations of words," in COLING'12.
Citeseer, 2012.
[139] K. M. Hermann and P. Blunsom, "Multilingual models for composi-
tional distributed semantics," arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.4641, 2014.
[140] S. Gouws, Y. Bengio, and G. Corrado, "Bilbowa: Fast bilingual
distributed representations without word alignments," arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.2455, 2014.
[141] E. Bruni, G. Boleda, M. Baroni, and N.-K. Tran, "Distributional
semantics in technicolor," in Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume
1.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012, pp. 136–145.
[142] C. W. Leong and R. Mihalcea, "Going beyond text: A hybrid image-
text approach for measuring word relatedness." in IJCNLP, 2011, pp.
1403–1407.
[143] R. Socher and L. Fei-Fei, "Connecting modalities: Semi-supervised
segmentation and annotation of images using unaligned text corpora,"
in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2010 IEEE
Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 966–973.
[144] A. Frome, G. S. Corrado, J. Shlens, S. Bengio, J. Dean, T. Mikolov
et al., "Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model," in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013, pp. 2121–2129.
[145] R. Kiros, R. Salakhutdinov, and R. Zemel, "Multimodal neural lan-
guage models," in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML-14), 2014, pp. 595–603.
[146] R. Socher, A. Karpathy, Q. V. Le, C. D. Manning, and A. Y. Ng,
"Grounded compositional semantics for finding and describing images
with sentences," Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, vol. 2, pp. 207–218, 2014.
[147] N. Srivastava and R. R. Salakhutdinov, "Multimodal learning with deep
boltzmann machines," in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2012, pp. 2222–2230.
[148] L. Mou, G. Li, Y. Xu, L. Zhang, and Z. Jin, "Distilling word
embeddings: An encoding approach," arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.04488,
2015.
[149] D. Zhang, T. Luo, D. Wang, and R. Liu, "Learning from LDA using
deep neural networks," arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01011, 2015.
[150] M. Long, J. Wang, G. Ding, D. Shen, and Q. Yang, "Transfer learning
with graph co-regularization," Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1805–1818, 2014.
Proceedings of APSIPA Annual Summit and Conference 2015
16-19 December 2015
978-988-14768-0-7©2015 APSIPA
1237
APSIPA ASC 2015
